My
name is Gabriel Katt and today is December 27th,
1983. I'll be interviewing Joseph J. Sanchez,
former managing director of General Motors of
Brazil. He is now general manager of Oldsmobile.
When
did General Motors first expand overseas?
General Motors first started going overseas in
the late teens and the very early 20s. As an
example, we've been in Brazil since 1926,
Argentina since 1925, and Uruguay since 1926
also. Was this pretty similar to what was
happening in other large corporations? I believe
it was. It was right after World War I and people
were looking to the expanding markets outside of
the United States. We'd lost the isolationist
influence as a result of World War I and people were
ready to expand their markets. What was produced?
In those markets at first, the initial
installations were mostly assembly plants,
installations that put together the parts as
exported from the United States. Passenger cars
mainly, but the greater degree of emphasis given
by the foreign governments, of course, were for
trucks and commercials, which they felt would be
more useful in developing their war-torn
economies. How do these overseas operations fit
into the General Motors corporate structure?
Well, at that point in time, a separate
organization was set up to handle them, which is
still in existence. It was called General Motors
Overseas Operations, headquartered in New York
City, not in Detroit, and handled as a separate
division within the corporation. Okay. Since
1950, the automotive industry has been growing
faster in underdeveloped countries than in
developed countries. What's caused this
increased interest in the underdeveloped
nations? Well... Again, since 1950, that's the
tail end of World War II, and every one of those
nations is interested in the development of its
economy, which can best be done by industries such
as the automotive industry, which are heavily
weighted towards labor and technological
development. Okay. What kind of restrictions do
these governments place on companies interested
in establishing plants in South America? Well,
the great majority of the South American
countries said, if you want to participate in our
markets, you've got to make an investment and
establish an industry in our country. Otherwise,
we are not going to let you continue shipping your
vehicles from your home plant into our country,
draining off our foreign exchange without
contributing anything to our development. So
what kind of incentives did these multinational
corporations offer? Well, the most important
incentive, of course, was access to the market.
The second incentive was a set of legislation that
permitted you to compete in those markets, make a
profit, and remit those profits to your home
office. What kind of factors did Jim look at in
deciding where to go, where to build and invest?
Pretty much the same factors that we look at in
establishing any business. The size of the
market, the potential of the market,
economic studies that give us an indication as to
where those markets are headed and whether the
size of the market justifies the risk and the
investment that we're placing in the country.
Quite a bit of emphasis is given to a forecast of
political stability, although that lately has
been very, very uncertain. Okay. What kind of
benefits does a country receive from a
multinational corporation's investment in that
country, such as labor? First and foremost, the
capital investment that comes in. which gives the
country an aura of economic respectability and
thereby enhances its ability to go out and borrow
money from other sources. In other words, the
banking system looks more favorably upon a
country that has a massive investment from a
General Motors or a Ford or a General Electric than
it would if it were strictly an underdeveloped
nation without any of the private sector taking
any of the risks. The other investments, of
course, are the jobs that are made available
because of the establishment of the industry.
technical improvement in the preparation of
their people, because they've got to be trained to
do their job in an automotive plant, and the
general positive impact on the balance of
payments of their country. Is there any cultural
exchange that is offered by General Motors, for
example? Well, General Motors offers a cultural
exchange that I guess could better be defined as an
educational exchange. As you know, we've got one
of the finest universities in the United States,
the General Motors Institute. And in Brazil, for
example, almost 200 of my executives in Brazil had
attended General Motors Institute for at least
one year, and most of them had been on a two-year
program. So in that sense, you've got a massive
transfer of cultures through the educational
system in the United States. So these are already
employed executives? In most cases from
overseas, they are employed executives or sons of
existing General Motors dealers. Okay, so is
there any opportunity for maybe just extremely
bright students to have that opportunity? In two
of the countries, Argentina and Brazil, and I
believe in Venezuela also, we had a scholarship
program for promising students, which enabled
them to come up and complete their education here
in the United States on a general scholarship.
Okay. Does the federal government encourage or
discourage investment and expansion overseas?
The federal government of the United States
doesn't really encourage or discourage. It
encourages because it would like to continue
improving the exports from the United States and
thereby help in our balance of payments problem,
but it doesn't do anything specific as far as
offering incentives like many other countries
do. In other words, they don't offer special tax
incentives like the Japanese do.
In general, it's just... a moral encouragement to
industry to get out and compete in those markets.
This hasn't changed any with the problems we're
having now, say, with Japan and the competition
there? No, it's changed very little outside of the
Overseas Investment Bank, which has some very,
very stringent rules and really is not
competitive in overseas markets. The United
States government does not assist in exporting
from the United States other than through
information services, but does not offer
specific incentives, again, like tax
incentives, like rebate incentives, like so many
of the others that the other countries use around
the world, Brazil and Japan particularly. Do U.S.
companies overseas get taxed twice, once by the
host country and once by the U.S.? No, not really.
I'm not an expert on tax matters, but They don't get
taxed twice. They can deduct their foreign taxes
from the United States taxes, so they only pay
taxes once. And I see what you're getting at. In
that sense, that is a benefit. However, what I was
thinking of was a corporate tax rate in the United
States of 48% and a corporate tax rate in Japan on
exports of 24%. Yeah, I was thinking of it of a much
more positive advantage as opposed to just
avoiding a negative of double taxation. Okay. So
what about the guarantee program? Guarantee in
what sense?
I guess it would affect oil companies mostly when a
country is taken over or something and they start
nationalizing all industry. You can get
political risk insurance for your foreign
investment, and that's true. That is a very
definite benefit. As a matter of fact, we had
political risk insurance in Chile when our
assembly plant was taken over by the Allende
government in, I believe, right at the very early
70s, right around 1970. And the insurance does
cover you against the takeover of your facilities
as a result of political upheaval. I believe that
that insurance is backed by the U.S. government,
but I also believe a lot of private insurance
companies are involved in it. Okay. How does the
fact that a tremendous number of American
corporations are building plants and expanding
overseas affect the U.S. economic and labor
situation? Well, so far it's been proven that the
more plants that are established overseas by
United States companies, the more jobs are
created in the United States.
a requirement for the establishment of those
plants. You need the technicians, you need the
technology, you need the supervision. Once the
plant is established and producing a consumer
product, which can be back shipped into the United
States, that of course could have a negative
impact on that particular industry for those
particular products. I think the biggest concern
in not allowing U.S. companies to establish
overseas and export their products to the United
States would be the very negative reaction from
foreign governments which would then shut off
other industries or other products. For example,
not allowing Japanese cars to come into the United
States could create the problem of the Japanese
not importing computers or agricultural
products or something in another line. The labor
unions generally are the most vocal about
overseas investment. Is there a lot of pressure by
the labor unions directed at domestic companies
to halt or slow down investment or change their
policies overseas? There is a lot of pressure, but
naturally the majority of the pressure comes on
the part of the unions on government in
Washington. You're right at the present time, as
you probably know. the unions are promoting what
they call a local content law in the automotive
industry, which would require an imported car
into the United States to have a certain
percentage of United States parts in the car
before it could be imported, thereby, in the
union's view, generating jobs for those
industries that manufacture those parts. This is
very common around the world. This is not an
original idea. In Brazil, for example, every
vehicle produced in Brazil had to have 85%
Brazilian parts before it could be built and sold
in the country, thereby guaranteeing local
industry, local labor, and a tactic of an
underdeveloped nation to continue protecting
its jobs. So that kind of pressure does exist. The
law has passed Congress at the present time. It
probably will not pass the Senate. It will
probably be rejected in the Senate. And if it is not
rejected in the Senate, President Reagan has
promised to veto it anyway, so it doesn't seem like
it's going to prosper. Is this due to auto industry
pressure or counter-lobbying? Well, do you mean
the veto of the law? Yeah. No, I think the
automotive industry has, in general... Now, let
me be more specific. Chrysler Corporation has
come out in favor of such a law. As a matter of fact,
Lee Iacocca believes that it should be in
existence, thereby defending U.S. jobs. Both
Ford and General Motors have adopted a very
neutral attitude towards the law. I think in our
particular case, General Motors recognizes that
that kind of legal restriction would probably
only generate major problems for us in our other
facilities around the world and would be of no
immediate benefit to us. Chrysler, on the other
hand, like I say, does support it, so there is a
split decision on the part of the industry. And as
far as I know, the only lobbying that's going on for
that law is in favor of the law on the part of
Chrysler Corporation. OK. What kind of
integration is there with local industries as far
as supplies and sales go? In an overseas country?
Integration in the sense of the car manufacturer,
like General Motors, being a partner with the
suppliers, or
we normally are not partners with our suppliers.
We do not invest capital in our suppliers What we do
do in most cases in these underdeveloped nations
is we go to a supplier that has potential. Let's
take a metal bender somewhere in Uruguay that
thinks he can perhaps manufacture a radiator. We
will go in there with our specifications, our
designs, and our engineers, literally set him up
in business, recommend the equipment he has to
buy, give him the specifications of the radiators
we will buy, loan him the money for his initial
investment in raw materials and inventory,
promise him that we will buy the product once he
manufactures it for us, prepay for the product
before we even receive it, and in that way take
somebody who's got no capital but has some budding
talent and get him into the business and try to turn
him into a reliable supplier over time. So that
it's almost a red cross of automotive suppliers in
order to get some of these emerging nations
started into the automotive business. Okay. How
much of what's produced in the jam plants is
exported? In our overseas plants? Well, in Latin
America, relatively little. In Brazil, in its
biggest year, which was 1981, we produced about
230,000 cars and trucks, of which a little over
20,000 were exported. So about 10% of our
production was exported, and they were exported
exclusively to other Latin American countries.
some African republics. Atom opal in Germany is
our largest exporter. It produces about a million
units a year of which it, and it absorbs perhaps
around a half a million in the German market and the
other half million is exported to the other
European markets. We do very little exporting of
cars and trucks to the United States for a number of
reasons. One of which is that the most important of
which is that U.S. legislation on the vehicle is
both safety and and pollution-type legislation
virtually precludes the foreign-built cars that
we make from coming back into the United States.
What about parts production? Parts? And being
exported back to the States? That we do quite a bit
of. In Mexico, for example, you've got a number of
plants, border plants, that are set up according
to regulations Mexican legislation, which
produced parts and are exported to the United
States. We have an extensive exchange. And I must
apologize because my experience of overseas,
when I say overseas, I mean outside of North
America. I keep forgetting that Canada is an
independent country. nation on our northern
border, quite a number of cars are produced in
Canada and back shipped into the United States in
accordance with the automotive trade agreement
between the two countries where parts go to
Canada, Canada makes the cars and then exports
them back into the United States. That whole
exchange with Canada is very positive for the
United States, both in balance of payments and in
the efficiency of the use of facilities. But
excluding Canada from any of my comments, we do
ship parts in here from Mexico. uh including some
engines we export engines from brazil into the
united states we export some electrical
components from singapore and hong kong and an
extensive part shipment does go on from other
countries back into the united states okay do any
south american countries have labor unions or
organizations like that oh they all do they all do
are they as well organized as they are here as
powerful Depends on the country. Argentina in
1972, the labor unions became so powerful that
they became unwieldy. They became so powerful
that they literally brought the country to its
knees with a power that was totally misused.
Brazil, on the other hand, has had labor unions for
many, many years, and they have been relatively
ineffective because the government did not allow
them to exercise power. the normal prerogatives
as we know them here in the United States. A labor
union in Brazil, for example, until 1981 could
only negotiate non-economic issues. In other
words, the government decided what the wage
increases and what the benefits were going to be to
the workers, and the union itself only could
negotiate perhaps overtime legislation,
perhaps vacation legislation. items that were
minor in the minds of the workers and thereby took
away from the strength of that particular union.
So you've got unions at all levels and at all
degrees of effectiveness.
What positions in a GM plant are filled by American
employees? Well, the obvious answer is those
positions that can't be filled adequately by
local employees. Let me give you an example. In
Brazil, we had 23,000 people working in the
company, and we had 18 Americans, U.S. employees,
in the company. And of those U.S. employees, eight
of the 18 were in staff positions. The other eight
staff positions were filled by Brazilians. The
remainder of the Americans, the other ten, The
majority of them reported to Brazilians. But
there were technicians, technicians in the
financial sense mostly. We had five technicians
from GMAC in the United States down there helping
us run our finance company. And we had three
finance department technicians in the finance
department, treasury and controller, in the
money-raising aspects of the business. But in
general, our policy is that a Brazilian should
fill any position that he's qualified to fill. We
would rather have a Brazilian executive in the job
than an American executive. What do you mean by
staff position? Staff position? There were 16
people on my staff, of which 10 were major
department heads. They headed up departments
such as engineering, manufacturing, finance,
reliability, sales, Those are the major
department heads. And then there were another six
positions that were the subsidiary ones, like the
head of the finance company or the controller or
the director of public relations or the director
of government relations. And those 16 people were
my cadre, which met on a weekly basis to establish
the policy for the company. And of those 16... half
were Brazilian and half were Americans, not by
design. That's not part of a policy 50-50. On the
contrary, as I said before, the policy is, if we can
at all do it, to have 100% Brazilians in the job. Is
the local employee restricted to promotion
within plants in that country, or could he
theoretically be transferred to the U.S.? On the
contrary, we encourage the same policy that we
follow here in the United States, where we're
encouraging Americans to take an overseas
assignment as part of their career development
path. And in overseas territories, we do the same
thing with overseas employees. We encourage
Brazilians to take assignments outside of
Brazil, just as we encourage Germans to take
assignments outside of Germany to better prepare
them for their careers in their own countries. Is
there any, let's see how to put this, how do
American employees, I mean in America, react to
having foreign bosses? In their overseas
assignments? No, here. Here in the United States?
Yeah, okay, the foreign manager in his overseas
assignment to the States, for example. You mean a
Brazilian back to the United States? How would the
American react working for a Brazilian? Yeah, is
there ever any problem with that? Never any real
problem, and I hesitate to answer the question
because there's always a little bit of
differences in national ways of thinking A
Brazilian will focus on a problem a little bit
different than an American. And if the American or
the Brazilian, it's vice versa, they reply. If the
American or the Brazilian doesn't recognize that
that is the foreign way of doing things and that the
man is very, very capable... There is a little bit
of a resentment and a feeling that perhaps the boss
doesn't know as much as he should know. In most
cases, they recognize the fact that the man has
been put in that job because he has the capability
to handle it. And once they get used to his
techniques, his way of thinking, his way of
approaching the job, we have no problems. In
general, with some exceptions like anything else
in this world, but in general, it's been a very,
very effective way of training our people, both
U.S. people overseas or overseas people in the
United States. Do many women rise to management or
supervisory positions, or does this depend on the
country in South America where a plant is located?
A lot of it depends on the country, but
unfortunately, you know, women in the automotive
business have not had the tremendous levels of
success that they have in other industries, and
It's a little bit difficult to explain why that is.
I guess that so many of the success paths in our
industry are up the sales side. And it is very
difficult for a woman to break into the automotive
sales end of the business, going out around the
country, calling on dealers as the men do. It's
been something that in Latin American countries
has been very difficult for them to accept. We had
one woman in our management, out of our top
management in Brazil, of approximately 90
executives. We had one woman that had achieved
that level. And fortunately, in the last five or
six years, there were another five that were
progressing to the point where I believe by 1984 or
5, they will also be joining the group. So the
process is accelerating, but it is substantially
behind where it is in the United States. Are there
any minority employment problems in South
American countries? Broad question. Very, very
broad question. I guess we could start off by
asking the question, are there minorities in some
of these countries? And I guess there are, just
like there are in the United States. But, for
example, a black, by virtue of the fact that there
are so few of them, is very definitely a minority in
Argentina and Chile, for example. A black, on the
other hand, is not a minority in Brazil by virtue of
the fact that there are so many of them. And there's
been such a mixing of the races over the last 100
years in Brazil as opposed to the other countries
so that Brazil does not feel that it has any kind of a
racial problem, although blacks do have
difficulty getting the same educational
treatment and the same employment treatment, but
Brazilians do not look upon them as minorities.
So, yes, in some countries you've got a minority
problem, black rising to the hierarchy of
management in Argentina, for example, I believe
is totally unknown. Not so in Brazil, where
national heroes, sporting heroes are black.
There have been political leaders that are blacks
that are recognized as outstanding citizens by
their own people. So it varies from country to
country. The further north you get in South
America, the less likely it is that the blacks are
considered minorities, and I'm saying this
incorrectly, the further north you progress, the
more integrated the blacks are into the economy
and into the national life of their country. The
southern countries, by virtue of the fact of
having received very few blacks originally, as a
result of the slaves being brought over from
Africa back in the 18th and 19th centuries, have
very few blacks, and there they are minorities.
Chile, Argentina, for example. And so are they
discriminated against in that sense, whatever
would constitute a minority? I think you see
discrimination in the same fashion that we had it
in the United States 30 years ago, where it was
covert discrimination more than overt
discrimination. And I guess I'm talking about
that point in time when the signs stopped reading
sit in the back of the bus or for whites only in the
northern cities. That kind of discrimination I
have not seen. But the covert kind, I guess, is the
more pernicious. It's the one that when you look
around an office, you don't see any black people in
the office, or you don't see any women who are also
minorities in a lot of these cases in the office.
You see only white males. And You ask yourself what
has happened to the fabric of the country that has
created this situation where only white males can
sit in this job and 100 desk jobs and they're all
white males. There's not a single woman and not a
single black. And you trace it back and you find out
that they're still not getting the same
educational opportunities. They're not getting
the same advancement opportunities. Now, in all
of these countries, I think without exception,
massive steps have been taken to correct this. And
I believe that the leader in doing all this has been
the United States. I think the United States'
example of what we have gone through over the past
30 years in trying to correct the minority
treatment situation has received such favorable
press and such a spotlight of attention from the
countries in Latin America that they themselves,
whether they know it or not, are following our
example.
Did the energy crisis in the early 70s have as
profound an effect in South America as it did in the
United States? Oh, very much so, particularly in
those countries that were very strong net
importers of petroleum products like Brazil,
like Uruguay. Uruguay imports 100% of its
petroleum requirements. Brazil was importing
85% of its requirements when the first crisis hit.
Terrible impact on the economies, particularly
from the inflationary point of view, as their
petroleum costs doubled, tripled, and
quadrupled over a very short period of time. So
that the economies were caught totally
unprepared, and I think Some of the things you're
seeing now in the Brazilian economy particularly
and in the economy of an Uruguay and an Ecuador and a
Chile are still the strong aftershocks of that
energy crisis. Their incredible inflation rate?
Yes. They've never been able to bring it back down
to manageable levels. Once it achieved a level of
30 to 40 percent a year as a result of the energy
shock, it just picked up momentum and swept on up
from that level. What kind of changes were
implemented in car production in South America as
a result of the crisis? Well, the biggest change
that took place as a result of the crisis was that
the markets went into a stalemate position, into
stagnation. Markets fell off and the volume fell
off sharply. Brazil was the only one that adopted,
after the second energy crisis in the late 70s, an
alternate fuels program. trying to develop the
usage of alcohol in passenger car engines and
thereby maintaining their industrial
production at a high level regardless of what was
happening outside with OPEC. They were very
successful with that program. Today, over 95% of
all the cars produced in Brazil have 100% ethyl
alcohol engines. And they themselves now have
been able to produce over 40% of their petroleum
requirements and have cut down their dependency
on outside petroleum sources substantially from
where they were five and six years ago. No other
countries down there are following their lead? No
other countries following their lead, to my
knowledge. There have been interested nations.
South Africa, who finds itself isolated from the
rest of the world. Indonesia, who has the
potential for... producing the necessary sugar
cane to generate sufficient alcohol in
quantities that would make this feasible. The
Philippines finds themselves in the same
situation. But none of those countries has gotten
it off the ground as yet, other than for a minor
gasohol-type program, where 10% or less of the
fuel pumped into your tank is alcohol combined
with gasoline. Brazil is the only one that had the
land area. had the necessary government
conditions in place to overnight put a program of
this dimension into effect and did it very, very
successfully. And General Motors and Ford,
whoever else down there, were all involved in
this? All directly involved. As a matter of fact,
the first meetings that were held on this subject
were with the Minister of Industry in 1977, and I
participated in those meetings, and we were given
two years to get the program into effect to develop
engines that ran 100% on alcohol. We asked for
three, we were given two, and the consequences
were almost predictable. We produced the
original vehicles, and we had very serious
quality and service problems with them, not
having had sufficient time to test them
adequately. But by the end of the first year and a
half of the program, The engines were as reliable
as the current gasoline engines had been once we'd
taken out all of the potential for corrosion,
which was the biggest problem we were having with
the alcohol. And we are now, Ford, General Motors,
Volkswagen, Fiat, and Mercedes-Benz, who are the
major five in Brazil, are now the world
authorities on alcohol engines. And we, in fact,
General Motors Brazil, is the... is the alcohol
project center for General Motors Corporation in
the world. In other words, if anybody wants to know
anything about alcohol engines, they consult us
in Brazil instead of consulting the home office.
OK. General Motors spent 53 years in Argentina.
What caused them to withdraw in 78? Oh, it was a
combination of offense. I was there in 1972 and
1973, two very difficult years when Juan Domingo
Peron came back and was elected as president of the
country. Economic crisis after economic crisis,
the Argentine economy riding its usual roller
coaster of highs and lows. And we at General
Motors, in expectation of better times, had been
waiting for those better times and had allowed our
product lineup to not to develop adequately and
maintain a competitive position. So that when
1979 rolled around and the Argentine government
decided that perhaps they wanted to rationalize
their industry and reduce the number of
manufacturers in the country, we found ourselves
with the necessity to make a massive investment of
well over $100 million. And the outlook was that
that investment could never be recovered. The
market would never rise to a point that would make
this a wise decision. That, coupled with the
government's desire to cut back on manufacturers
and their refusal to assist any of the
manufacturers with any of their problems,
prompted us to say, well, this is as good a time as
any, and we shut down the operation that we'd had in
Argentina since 1926.
That's not the last comment on the situation,
however. A year ago, we went back in and started
negotiating with a local company in Argentina,
some kind of a joint venture whereby the local
company could perhaps assemble our products for
us in that country. And I would not be surprised to
see General Motors vehicles once again sold in
Argentina inside of 24 months. In the 60s in Chile,
many locally owned auto companies went out of
business or were taken over by foreign firms. Why
was that? Well, in the 60s, you actually had two
series of problems. In the very early 60s, and I
arrived in Chile on August 1, 1960, so I'm familiar
with it. The government wanted to develop its
national industry, as I said at the beginning of
this interview. And they, at the same time, wanted
to defend their national boundaries against
their sworn enemy, Peru. So they selected a city
called Arica on the very northern tip of Chile and
created a free zone and told everybody that they
could establish automotive industries in the
city of Arica on a no-duty basis, which would make
it a very favorable competitor with the rest of the
country, and put the legislation in place to make
it happen. However, they also insisted that they
had to be national companies. So at that point in
time, Ford, which was about the only one that had
maintained an investment in that country, closed
up shop and the assembly plants in Arica were
established by Chilean car dealers. At the end of
the decade, when Salvador Allende came in as
president, Salvador Allende, as you know, was a
socialist president and a great part of his
cabinet were communists, decided to take over the
major industries in the country. And one of these
was the General Motors plant. By that time, we were
back in the country. In other words, the dealer had
established the industry in 1964. We had
purchased it from him in 1969. Allende took it away
from us in 1971. When Allende committed suicide in
1973, the new military government asked us to take
it back. We have taken it back. We're now operating
it. So it's been a little bit of a roller coaster
revolving door yo-yo type program in Chile over
the last 20 years with uh the chileans having
difficulty making up their mind what they want the
industry to do and general mode is trying to react
to whatever new set of circumstances appeared on
the horizon okay brazil has shown tremendous
growth and development in the past years what role
have multinational corporations and gm in
specific played in this growth well the
multinational corporations have played a key
role in this growth the revolution took place in
The legislation was put in place to encourage
foreign investments by 1967-68, and General
Motors was one of the first to make a large
investment in the country to manufacture
passenger cars. We had been assembling vehicles
since the middle 20s, as I mentioned before. It
wasn't just us. It was a number of other major
multinational corporations, including
multinational corporations that manufacture
parts. And when we talk about multinational,
let's not just think of U.S. corporations, but a
lot of European corporations came in also. Bosch
came in, manufactured electrical equipment.
Fiat came in with its latest technology. So that
the backing of these multinational companies
with its investment gave Brazil the needed
capital to put its vaunted economic miracle in
place. As you will recall, the Brazilian economy,
until the second oil shock, was growing at a rate of
6% to 8% a year and was being called the economic
miracle of the world because of its tremendous
success. Since then, of course, events have
caught up with it, and it's no longer an economic
miracle because people realize that they've done
it all. They've done a great part of it on borrowed
funds that it appears cannot be repaid at an
appropriate time. But General Motors was a key
part in this development, and during my years
there since 1976, not unusual for a new investor to
come to General Motors and ask to talk to us
specifically on our experiences in the country
with the government, what we thought of the future
of the country, what we thought of doing business
in Brazil, how we felt we were being treated. make
its decisions according to the recommendations
it received from people like ourselves who had no
political axe to grind and who apparently
maintained a higher degree of credibility with
new investors than a foreign government could. So
they played an extremely key and important role in
the development of the country. Does industry
work in conjunction with the U.S. government in
any aspect of U.S. foreign policy? By industry, I
mean American industry. No, none. As far as
foreign policy is concerned, none. We must
follow, according to U.S. law, U.S. legislation.
For example, despite the fact that General Motors
Brazil is a Brazilian company, we could not sell
products to any of those countries on the
so-called United States blacklist, which is a
very limited group of countries, but right now
consists of North Korea, Cuba, I don't know,
there's three others or thereabouts, but
countries that the United States government felt
were a threat to its security. Russia and China, by
the way, are not on that list, just to give you an
idea of the specific nature of the list. So we had to
follow U.S. legislation. But as far as
influencing or assisting U.S. foreign policy,
none of that went on specifically. Okay. Did you
ever deal personally with any South American
political figures? Oh, yeah, on a constant basis.
See, you have to remember, for example, General
Motors in Brazil was the fifth largest privately
owned corporation in the country. That would be
like being the president or the chairman of Ford
here in the United States. And I had the same access
to the Brazilian government that the president of
Ford would have to the United States government
because of its importance to the national
economy. So I dealt with Salvador Allende in Chile
when he was a senator before he became president. I
met him while he was president. I've met the
presidents and the cabinet members even more
importantly because the cabinet members are the
ones that established the industrial policy. In
Argentina, in Uruguay, in Brazil, in Venezuela,
in every country that we're established, we are a
very powerful force from a world image point of
view, it's very important for a government to say
that General Motors has an operation in their
country. It gives them an international level of
stability that they're very anxious to maintain.
And as a result, the contacts are continuous. You
talk about an image. Well, so then a country is able
to get, let's say, all the loans that Brazil got.
What's going to happen? What can potentially
happen when a country like Brazil right now can't
pay back all that money? I've read a lot of
scenarios, and I was on the scene for quite a long
time.
disaster scenario of course is that they don't pay
declare a moratorium in the united states banking
system collapses right uh i don't think that's
going to happen at all i think what's going to
happen is is a little bit of more of the same i think
that the united that the banking system itself is
to blame for a lot of what's happened uh i know
personally people that were in brazil soliciting
the brazilian government to take additional
loans at very attractive interest rates
advantageous to the banking system at a point in
time when Brazil, it was very, very clear that
their balance of payments was not generating
enough funds to pay off those debts. The banking
system has gotten much more cautious, much more
realistic in releasing new loans, and Brazil
finds itself in a position of over $90 billion in
debt. with just an interest amortization on that
debt of $8 to $9 billion a year and a favorable
balance of payments. This year, it's going to be
their most favorable year ever, and they'll
probably have a favorable balance of payments of
$7 billion. So it's obvious that they can't even
pay the interest on the loan, that they need new
loans to continue paying the interest on the old
loans. And I think that's what's going to happen. I
think there's going to be a rescheduling of the
debt, a stretching out of... of the payment
periods, perhaps a delay in the payment of the
principal with a continuation of the payment of
the interest, and some kind of an arrangement
between the international banking system and the
government that will allow the country to
continue functioning and developing and allow
the banks to continue to carry that debt and feel
comfortable about eventually collecting it.
when nobody knows and nobody's too anxious to find
out. Okay, do U.S. executives overseas usually
bring their families with them? Yeah, always. The
executive that did not bring his family was the
very obvious exception. He was either separated
or didn't have a family to bring. As a matter of
fact, we at General Motors encouraged our
executives and almost insisted that they bring
their families. We felt that an executive with his
family could do a much better job because of the
degree of stability that continuing family life
provided them as opposed to being concerned about
what mama was doing with the house in Connecticut
or something. Is there much social mixing with the
local population or do the Americans tend to
socialize with each other as happens in military
bases quite often? A difficult question to answer
with just one answer. Some Americans associate
only with Americans and always will because they
feel comfortable with something that they're
very, very familiar with. But the vast majority of
them, us, associated with the local population.
Very, very close friends in the Brazilian,
Argentine, Uruguayan, Chile community, in my
case. We had no problems with the language, liked
the people, and discovered that that was really
the way that we got a lot more out of the time that we
spent in the country. so that I would say the vast
majority of Americans really make an effort to get
out and mix with the local community. So there
isn't any problem in learning the language, or do,
like in Europe, do most people speak English?
Well, that is a very serious problem, and there I
blame the United States educational system for
not insisting that everybody learn at least one
foreign language while he's growing up, because
my experience has been if you learn one, you can
learn two. But when you've learned a second
language, you can learn a third language very
easily. If you've never learned any language
except your own, By the age of 40, it's almost
impossible to learn a foreign language, and it is a
problem. And Americans have much more
difficulty, in general, now there are very
specific examples to the contrary, but in
general, have much more difficulty learning a
foreign language than most overseas people or
foreigners. And it is a problem in doing their jobs
and in making themselves feel at home in a foreign
country. How many South American countries,
well, many of them have unstable governments. How
does this affect the lifestyle of Americans
overseas? Well, the degree of instability,
again, is relative. In Brazil, for example, the
government was very, very stable. The lifestyle
was totally free, no problems. In 1972, 1973 in
Argentina, the government was totally unstable.
It was a military government with a very strong
degree of... of terrorism, kidnapping,
assassinations. The president of Fiat was
assassinated, for example. Three executives,
one American and two Argentine executives of the
Ford Motor Company were assassinated. It puts a
lot of pressure on family life. You become a lot
more careful. You live under constant security.
And it's a very, very nervous and trying times. But
I think most of the families that I knew came
through stronger than ever before as a result of
their experiences. Once you came through it, it
was something that you could point to with pride
for the rest of your life. I've met people from
those times since, and they're very, very proud of
what happened to them there. Okay.
Is terrorism or protest generally directed at the
plant or company as a whole or at individual
Americans?